A man may climb Everest for himself, but at the summit he plants his country's flag.
And what a prize we have to fight for: no less than the chance to banish from our land the dark divisive clouds of Marxist socialism.
Any leader has to have a certain amount of steel in them, so I am not that put out being called the Iron Lady.
Any woman who understands the problems of running a home will be nearer to understanding the problems of running a country.
It seems like cloud cuckoo land... If anyone is suggesting that I would go to Parliament and suggest the abolition of the pound sterling - no! We have made it quite clear that we will not have a single currency imposed on us.
A world without nuclear weapons would be less stable and more dangerous for all of us.
Being prime minister is a lonely job... you cannot lead from the crowd.
Christmas is a day of meaning and traditions, a special day spent in the warm circle of family and friends.
Conservatives have excellent credentials to speak about human rights. By our efforts, and with precious little help from self-styled liberals, we were largely responsible for securing liberty for a substantial share of the world's population and defending it for most of the rest.
Constitutions have to be written on hearts, not just paper.
Defeat? I do not recognise the meaning of the word.
Democratic nations must try to find ways to starve the terrorist and the hijacker of the oxygen of publicity on which they depend.
Don't follow the crowd, let the crowd follow you.
Do you know that one of the great problems of our age is that we are governed by people who care more about feelings than they do about thoughts and ideas.
During my lifetime most of the problems the world has faced have come, in one fashion or other, from mainland Europe, and the solutions from outside it.
Europe was created by history. America was created by philosophy.
Every family should have the right to spend their money, after tax, as they wish, and not as the government dictates. Let us extend choice, extend the will to choose and the chance to choose.
For every idealistic peacemaker willing to renounce his self-defence in favour of a weapons-free world, there is at least one warmaker anxious to exploit the others' good intentions.
Freedom will destroy itself if it is not exercised within some sort of moral framework, some body of shared beliefs, some spiritual heritage transmitted through the Church, the family, and the school.
I always cheer up immensely if an attack is particularly wounding because I think, well, if they attack one personally, it means they have not a single political argument left.
I am extraordinarily patient, provided I get my own way in the end.
I am in politics because of the conflict between good and evil, and I believe that in the end good will triumph.
I do not know anyone who has got to the top without hard work. That is the recipe. It will not always get you to the top, but should get you pretty near.
I don't mind how much my Ministers talk, so long as they do what I say.
If it is once again one against forty-eight, then I am very sorry for the forty-eight.
If... many influential people have failed to understand, or have just forgotten, what we were up against in the Cold War and how we overcame it, they are not going to be capable of securing, let alone enlarging, the gains that liberty has made.
If my critics saw me walking over the Thames they would say it was because I couldn't swim.
If you just set out to be liked, you will be prepared to compromise on anything at anytime, and would achieve nothing.
If you lead a country like Britain, a strong country, a country which has taken a lead in world affairs in good times and in bad, a country that is always reliable, then you have to have a touch of iron about you.
If you want something said, ask a man; if you want something done, ask a woman.
Terrorism thrives on a free society. The terrorist uses the feelings in a free society to sap the will of civilisation to resist. If the terrorist succeeds, he has won and the whole of free society has lost.
I just owe almost everything to my father and it's passionately interesting for me that the things that I learned in a small town, in a very modest home, are just the things that I believe have won the election.
I love argument, I love debate. I don't expect anyone just to sit there and agree with me, that's not their job.
I seem to smell the stench of appeasement in the air.
I shall not be pulling the levers there but I shall be a very good back-seat driver.
It is always important in matters of high politics to know what you do not know. Those who think that they know, but are mistaken, and act upon their mistakes, are the most dangerous people to have in charge.
It is not the creation of wealth that is wrong, but the love of money for its own sake.
It is one of the great weaknesses of reasonable men and women that they imagine that projects which fly in the face of commonsense are not serious or being seriously undertaken.
It may be the cock that crows, but it is the hen that lays the eggs.
It pays to know the enemy not least because at some time you may have the opportunity to turn him into a friend.
It used to be about trying to do something. Now it's about trying to be someone.
I usually make up my mind about a man in ten seconds, and I very rarely change it.
I've got a woman's ability to stick to a job and get on with it when everyone else walks off and leaves it.
Left-wing zealots have often been prepared to ride roughshod over due process and basic considerations of fairness when they think they can get away with it. For them the ends always seems to justify the means. That is precisely how their predecessors came to create the gulag.
Look at a day when you are supremely satisfied at the end. It's not a day when you lounge around doing nothing; it's when you've had everything to do, and you've done it.
Most women defend themselves. It is the female of the species - it is the tigress and lioness in you - which tends to defend when attacked.
My policies are based not on some economics theory, but on things I and millions like me were brought up with: an honest day's work for an honest day's pay; live within your means; put by a nest egg for a rainy day; pay your bills on time; support the police.
Nothing is more obstinate than a fashionable consensus.
Of course it's the same old story. Truth usually is the same old story.
Oh, but you know, you do not achieve anything without trouble, ever.
One of the things being in politics has taught me is that men are not a reasoned or reasonable sex.
One only gets to the top rung of the ladder by steadily climbing up one at a time, and suddenly all sorts of powers, all sorts of abilities which you thought never belonged to you suddenly become within your own possibility and you think, Well, I'll have a go, too.
Pennies do not come from heaven. They have to be earned here on earth.
People think that at the top there isn't much room. They tend to think of it as an Everest. My message is that there is tons of room at the top.
Platitudes? Yes, there are platitudes. Platitudes are there because they are true.
Some Socialists seem to believe that people should just be numbers. We believe they should be individuals. We are all unalike. No one, thank heavens, is like anyone else, however much the Socialists may pretend otherwise.
Standing in the middle of the road is very dangerous; you get knocked down by the traffic from both sides.
The battle for women's rights has been largely won. The days when they were demanded and discussed in strident tones should be gone for ever. And I hope they are. I hated those strident tones that you still hear from some Women's Libbers.
The choice facing the nation is between two totally different ways of life: no less than the chance to banish from our land the dark, divisive clouds of Marxist socialism and bring together men and women from all walks of life who share a belief in freedom.
The facts of life are Conservative.
...The larger the slice taken by government, the smaller the cake available for everyone.
The problem with socialism is that you eventually run out of other people's money.
There are still people in my party who believe in consensus politics. I regard them as Quislings, as traitors... I mean it.
There can be no liberty unless there is economic liberty.
There is much to be said for trying to improve some disadvantaged people's lot. There is nothing to be said for trying to create heaven on earth.
There is no such thing as society: there are individual men and women, and there are families.
The spirit of envy can destroy; it can never build.
They've got the usual Socialist disease - they've run out of other people's money.
To be free is better than to be unfree always. Any politician who suggests the opposite should be treated as suspect.
To cure the British disease with socialism was like trying to cure leukaemia with leeches.
To me, consensus seems to be the process of abandoning all beliefs, principles, values and policies. So it is something in which no one believes and to which no one objects.
To those waiting with bated breath for that favourite media catchphrase, the U-turn, I have only this to say, You turn if you want; the lady's not for turning.
To wear your heart on your sleeve isn't a very good plan; you should wear it inside, where it functions best.
We Conservatives hate unemployment.
We want a society where people are free to make choices, to make mistakes, to be generous and compassionate. This is what we mean by a moral society; not a society where the state is responsible for everything, and no one is responsible for the state.
We were told our campaign wasn't sufficiently slick. We regard that as a compliment.
What Britain needs is an iron lady.
What is success? I think it is a mixture of having a flair for the thing that you are doing; knowing that it is not enough, that you have got to have hard work and a certain sense of purpose.
When people are free to choose, they choose freedom.
Whether it is in the United States or in mainland Europe, written constitutions have one great weakness. That is that they contain the potential to have judges take decisions which should properly be made by democratically elected politicians.
Whether manufactured by black, white, brown or yellow hands, a widget remains a widget and it will be bought anywhere if the price and quality are right. The market is a more powerful and more reliable liberating force than government can ever be.
You and I come by road or rail, but economists travel on infrastructure.
You don't tell deliberate lies, but sometimes you have to be evasive.
You may have to fight a battle more than once to win it.
I am not sure what is meant by those who say that the Party should return to something called "One Nation Conservatism". As far as I can tell by their views on European federalism, such people's creed would be better described as "No Nation Conservatism".
We have not successfully rolled back the frontiers of the State in Britain only to see them reimposed at European level, with a European super-State exercising a new dominance from Brussels.
European history shows that, first, there's nothing necessarily benevolent about programmes of European integration; second, desire to achieve utopian plans often poses a grave threat to freedom; and third, European unity has been tried before - the outcome was far from happy.
Europe is not based on a common language, culture and values... Europe is a result of plans. It is, in fact, a classic utopian project, a monument to the vanity of intellectuals, a programme whose inevitable destiny is failure; only the scale of the final damage done is in doubt.
The application of collective guilt, running from one generation to another, is a dangerous doctrine which would leave few modern nations unscathed.
The European single currency is bound to fail, economically, politically and indeed socially, though the timing, occasion and full consequences are all necessarily still unclear.
Countries trade with each other because that is the way to advance their interests. We do not need to beg people to trade with us - as long as we have something that people want, of a quality they expect and at a price they are prepared to pay.
Socialists have always spent much of their time seeking new titles for their beliefs, because the old versions so quickly become outdated and discredited.
When all the objectives of government include the achievement of equality - other than equality before the law - that government poses a threat to liberty.
To the extent that the West is to blame at all for the ills of the Third World it is to the extent that the West created Marx and his successors, among whom must be numbered many of those who advised the Third World leaders in post-war years.
In a system of free trade and free markets poor countries - and poor people - are not poor because others are rich. Indeed, if others became less rich the poor would in all probability become still poorer.
This is not a confrontation between left & right. I am trying to represent the deep feelings of many thousands of rank-and-file Tories in the country - and potential Conservative voters, too - who feel let down by our party and find themselves unrepresented in a political vacuum.
Our challenge is to create the kind of economic background which enables private initiative and private enterprise to flourish for the benefit of the consumer, employee, the pensioner, and society as a whole.
I believe we should judge people on merit and not on background.
I believe the person who is prepared to work hardest should get the greatest rewards and keep them after tax. That we should back the workers and not the shirkers: that it is not only permissible but praiseworthy to want to benefit your own family by your own efforts.
I place a profound belief - indeed a fervent faith - in the virtues of self reliance and personal independence. On these is founded the whole case for the free society.
Human progress is best achieved by offering the freest possible scope for the development of individual talents, qualified only by a respect for the qualities and the freedom of others.
This Party of ours has been on the defensive for too long. The time has come to counter-attack. The intellectual counter-attack is as important as the counter-attack in Parliament and in the constituencies. If we can win the battle of ideas, then the war will already be half-won.
I shall never stop fighting. I mean this country to survive, to prosper and to be free... I haven't fought the destructive forces of socialism for more than twenty years in order to stop now, when the critical phase of the struggle is upon us.
I sometimes think the Labour Party is like a pub where the mild is running out. If someone doesn't do something soon, all that's left will be bitter. (Laughter). And all that's bitter will be Left.
Let me give you my vision. A man's right to work as he will, to spend what he earns, to own property, to have the State as servant and not as master, these are the British inheritance. They are the essence of a free economy. And on that freedom all our other freedoms depend.
Safe Socialism? If it's safe, it's not Socialism. If it's Socialism, it's not safe. Signposts of Socialism point downhill to less freedom, less prosperity, more muddle, more failure. If we follow them to their destination, they will lead this nation into bankruptcy.
Our aim is not just to remove our uniquely incompetent Government from office, it is to destroy the socialist fallacies - indeed the whole fallacy of socialism - that the Labour Party exists to spread.
People from my sort of background needed Grammar schools to compete with children from privileged homes like Shirley Williams and Anthony Wedgwood Benn.
Marxists get up early in the morning to further their cause. We must get up even earlier to defend our freedom.
What has happened this winter could happen again next winter and so on and so on. What we face is a threat to our whole way of life. The case is now surely overwhelming, there will be no solution to our difficulties which does not include restriction on the power of the unions.
We Conservatives are realists. We know that the British are one of the most creative and gifted peoples on earth. But we also know that the British are individualists, who do not respond to state direction and control. We like leadership, yes. But, above all, we like freedom.
Communism never sleeps, never changes its objectives, nor must we. Our first duty to freedom is to defend our own. Then one day we might export a little to those peoples who have to live without it.
In our over-governed country, the creative majority have too little freedom & the tiny minority of wreckers have too much licence. The government I shall form next weekend will reverse this decisively. Help me free those who create wealth & to make the wreckers run for cover.
The right hon. Gentleman is afraid of an election is he? Oh, if I were going to cut and run I'd have gone after the Falklands. Afraid? Frightened? Frit? Couldn't take it? Right now inflation is lower than it has been for thirteen years, a record he couldn't begin to touch!
I came to office with one deliberate intent: to change Britain from a dependent to a self-reliant society, from a give-it-to-me to a do-it-yourself nation. A get-up-and-go, instead of a sit-back-and-wait-for-it Britain.
In the Conservative Party, we have no truck with outmoded Marxist doctrine about class warfare. For us, it is not who you are, who your family is or where you come from that matters. It is what you are and what you can do for our country that counts. That is our vision.
You never compromise with violence. You never compromise with intimidation. You never compromise with those who want to use it to extinguish freedom and democracy, because if you do then the very things for which you stand are extinguished.
Popular capitalism, which is the economic expression of liberty, is a far more attractive means for diffusing power in our society. Socialists cry "Power to the people" & raise the clenched fist as they say it. We all know what they mean - power over people, power to the State.
Our sovereignty does not come from Brussels - it is ours by right and by heritage.
Nazism (national Socialism) and communism (international socialism) were but two sides of the same coin.
We all see these great calamities with different eyes, and so their impact upon us is different.
The main contribution one can make as a student to one's country in peace or wartime is to study hard and effectively.
Each demand for security, whether of employment, income or social position, implies the exclusion from such benefits of those outside the privileged group - and would generate demands for countervailing privileges from excluded groups. In such a situation all will lose.
Everyone had something unique to offer in life and their responsibility was to develop those gifts - and heroes come from all backgrounds.
You cannot build a great nation or brotherhood of man by spreading envy or hatred.
Our opponents like to try and make you believe that Conservatism is a privilege of the few. But Conservatism conserves all that is great and best in our national heritage.
It is not our policy to suppress success.
Our policy is not built on envy or hatred, but on liberty for the individual man or woman.
Communism was the regime for the privileged elite, capitalism the creed for the common man.
When you stop selecting by ability you have to select according to some other inevitably less satisfactory criterion.
Those who use this country's great tradition of freedom of speech should not seek to deny that same freedom to others, especially to those who, like Mr Powell, spent their war years in distinguished service in the Forces.
Many senior policemen put greater emphasis on maintaining 'order' than on upholding the law. In practice that meant failing to uphold the rights of individuals against the rule of the mob.
The feminists hate me, don't they? And I don't blame them. For I hate feminism. It is poison.
Personal freedom and economic freedom are indivisible. You can't have one without the other. You can't lose one without losing the other.
Socialism. We reject it utterly for, however well-intended, it leads in one direction only: to the erosion and finally the destruction of the democratic way of life.
To many of us it seems that there is precious little difference between the policies of the Communist Party and the policies of the Labour Party.
I am a great admirer of Professor Hayek. Some of his books are absolutely supreme - "The Constitution of Liberty" and the three volumes on "Law, Legislation and Liberty" - and would be well read by almost every hon. Member.
The Falklands was a remarkable military operation, boldly planned, bravely executed, and brilliantly accomplished. We owe an enormous debt to the British forces. They have been supported by a people united in defence of our way of life and of our sovereign territory.
Let me say this, if you want someone weak you don't want me, there are plenty of others to choose from.
A Labour Britain would be a neutralist Britain. It would be the greatest gain for the Soviet Union in forty years. And they would have got it without firing a shot.
I believe passionately that people have a right, by their own efforts, to benefit their families, so we have taken down taxation. It doesn't matter to me who you are or what your background is. If you want to use your own efforts to work harder - yes, I am with you all the way.
There is nothing new about the Tory commitment to protect the environment. The last thing we want is to leave environmental debts for our children... It's we Conservatives who are not merely friends of the Earth - we are its guardians and trustees for generations to come.
1989 will be remembered for decades as the year when half the people of half our continent threw off their chains. The messages on our banners in 1979 - freedom, opportunity, family, enterprise, ownerships - are now inscribed on the banners in Leipzig, Warsaw, Budapest & Moscow.
Socialists don't like ordinary people choosing, for they might not choose Socialism.
The hon. Gentleman is saying that he would rather that the poor were poorer, provided that the rich were less rich. That way one will never create the wealth for better social services, as we have. What a policy.
Labour's policies are a vote of no confidence in the ability of British people to manage their own affairs. We have that confidence. Confidence in freedom and confidence in enterprise. That is what divides Conservatives from socialists.
Socialism is like one of those horrible viruses. You no sooner discover a remedy for one version, than it spontaneously evolves into another.
I tell you what they really mean, they mean, 'We don't like the expenditure we have agreed, we are unwilling to raise the tax to pay for it. Let us print the money instead.' The most immoral path of all.
You can't make people good, kind, generous, thoughtful or dutiful by compulsion. True harmony comes from the willing cooperation of free men. It is not served by an over-regulated society.
Socialists ... believe in increasing the power of government, in reducing the choices left to the people, and hence in diminishing their liberties. Their methods are high taxation, regimentation, compulsion, closed shops and blacklists.
I set out to destroy socialism because it was at odds with the character of the people. We were the first country in the world to roll back the frontiers of socialism, then roll forward the frontiers of freedom. We reclaimed our heritage; we are renewing and carrying it forward.
I am not a consensus politician. I'm a conviction politician.
When I'm out of politics I'm going to run a business, it'll be called rent-a-spine.
Being democratic is not enough, a majority cannot turn what is wrong into right. In order to be considered truly free, countries must also have a deep love of liberty and an abiding respect for the rule of law.
Whatever international action we agree upon to deal with environmental problems, we must enable all our economies to grow and develop because without growth you cannot generate the wealth required to pay for the protection of the environment.
By the end of my time as Prime Minister I was also becoming seriously concerned about the anti-capitalist arguments which the campaigners against global warming were deploying.
The doomsters' favourite subject today is climate change. Clearly no plan to alter climate could be considered on anything but a global scale, it provides a marvellous excuse for worldwide, supra-national socialism.
All collectivism is always conducive to oppression: it is only the victims who differ.
Politicians should resist the temptation to consider themselves experts in fields where they have no experience.
If a Tory does not believe that private property is one of the main bulwarks of individual freedom, then he had better become a socialist and have done with it.
I proclaim with confidence that Britain can get right back into the world competitive race if only we can break free of the collective chains which hold us back. Unlike the socialists, who trust the state, we trust the people. That is why we are the party of freedom.
Where there is discord, may we bring harmony. Where there is error, may we bring truth. Where there is doubt, may we bring faith. And where there is despair, may we bring hope.
Because you see, it is not as if you are judged wholly on what you say. You are up against people who deliberately set out to twist what you say to make it mean other things, and that I am afraid is part of the job, part of the world in which one lives.
I didn't realise how absolutely useless the House of Lords are. There they are, they just go along to collect 15,000 a year. They've got no guts. They should be defending Britain against the transfer of power to Maastricht and our loss of sovereignty and our loss of identity.
Unlike some of my colleagues, I never ceased to believe that the level of unemployment was related to the extent of trade union power. The unions had priced many of their members out of jobs by demanding excessive wages for insufficient output, so making goods uncompetitive.
I have enormous admiration for the Jewish people, inside or outside Israel. There have always been Jewish members of my staff and indeed my Cabinet. In fact I just wanted a Cabinet of clever, energetic people - and frequently that turned out to be the same thing.
The colour of someone's skin should not determine his or her political rights.
We were the first country to attempt and to succeed in rolling back the frontiers of socialism, which is the first cousin to communism.
We're leaving Downing Street for the last time after eleven-and-a-half wonderful years, and we're very happy that we leave the United Kingdom in a very, very much better state than when we came here eleven and a half years ago.
I started life with two great advantages: no money, and good parents.
I hate extremes of any kind. Communism and the National Front both seek the domination of the state over the individual. They both, I believe crush the right of the individual. To me, therefore, they are parties of a similar kind.
Once you give people the idea that all this can be done by the State, and that it is somehow second-best or even degrading to leave it to private people then you will begin to deprive human beings of one of the essential ingredients of humanity - personal moral responsibility.
We shall have to learn again to be one nation, or one day we shall be no nation.
Ordinary, established individual rights - rights of property, or free speech, or the right to choose one's child's education - are crushed by the imposition of collective rights. And the ultimate adjudicator is always the state.
We will not take money in taxes from those who work hard and pay it out to those who don't. We are trying to roll back the tide of Socialism. We must get 'stuck in' and sort out our problems in our traditional British way instead of asking the Government to intervene every time.
To be utterly clear about the hunger strike in the Maze prison: There can be no political justification for murder or any other crime. The Government will never concede political status to the hunger strikers, or to any others convicted of criminal offences in the Province.
Peace, freedom and justice are only to be found where people are prepared to defend them.
At one end of the spectrum are terrorist gangs within our borders, and terrorist states which finance and arm them. At the other are the Hard Left operating inside our system, conspiring to use union power and the apparatus of local government to break, defy and subvert the law.
Our freedoms depended on our having independence, independence in the wage packet, and independence of the Government. If you rely always on a Government for your wage packet, then the source of your independence to fight that Government has gone.
The whole history of negotiation with the Soviet Union teaches us that if you do something they want without insisting on something in return, the Soviets do not regard it as a kindness to be reciprocated, but as a weakness to be exploited.
The Labour Party has now been taken over by extremists. The Labour Party is now committed to a programme which is frankly and unashamedly Marxist, a programme initiated by its National Executive and now firmly endorsed by its official Party Conference
The only way to do the best you can is to work as hard as you can.
I can't bear Britain in decline. I just can't. We who either defeated or rescued half Europe, who kept half Europe free, when otherwise it would be in chains.
We had to fight the enemy without in the Falklands. We always have to be aware of the enemy within, which is much more difficult to fight and more dangerous to liberty.
The philosophical reason for which we are against nationalization and for private enterprise is because we believe that economic progress comes from the inventiveness, ability, determination and the pioneering spirit of extraordinary men and women.
It is mankind and his activities which are changing the environment of our planet in damaging and dangerous ways.
The new dogma about climate change has swept through the left-of-centre governing classes.
Inflation is the parent of unemployment and the unseen robber of those who have saved.
There are too many people who imagine that there is something sophisticated about always believing the best of those who hate your country, and the worst of those who defend it.
You don't win by just being against things, you only win by being for things and making your message perfectly clear.
Prosperity comes not from grand conferences of economists but by countless acts of personal self-confidence and self-reliance.
I do not believe that even the free and ordered society which as a party we are trying to foster can satisfy the deepest human needs. I do not think that even this society will be able to sustain itself unless it keeps its religious foundations in good repair.
I believe in Britain. I believe in the British people. I believe in our future.
I reject Marxism because its doctrines seem to me false. It is the negation of human dignity. Wherever you have Marxist Government you have tyranny, oppression and drabness.
In a Conservative society we must strive to use the welfare state to help people to independence not condemn them to dependence. Our caring community must continue to help the needy and those for whom only the state can provide.
We Conservatives want power more widely diffused through private ownership, so that you never get more power in the hands of the Government than you get in the hands of the people.
Freedom can be lost more swiftly than it is gained. Even in a parliamentary democracy a Government machine can gradually and silently whittle our freedom away.
Freedom of choice is the essence of a free society, and that includes the right to choose how you spend your earnings. Every time the Government takes a bigger slice of your pay-packet, it is taking a bigger slice of your freedom.
If people come to believe that the State or their employer or their union owe them a living; and that, in turn, the world owes Britain a living, we shall have no confidence and no future.
Socialism must return for ever to its proper place - the reading room of the British Library where Karl Marx found it, Section: History of Ideas, Subsection 19th Century, Status Archaic.
A country's top rate of tax is a symbol. Very little revenue is collected from people in this country who pay tax at the highest rates. A top rate of 83 per cent is not much of a revenue raiser, it is the symbol of British socialism - the symbol of envy. (1978 speech)
Too often trade unions are dominated by a tiny handful of extremists who do not reflect the common sense views of most union members. Wider use of secret ballots for decision-making throughout the trade union movement should be given every encouragement.
Well, you know, the opinion polls can be very deceptive indeed. The only real opinion poll are election polls.
Conservatives believe that the right way to meet our housing needs is to spend money on helping more and more families to become home owners rather than to subsidise them indefinitely as council tenants.
Conservatives are not in the business of Government to forge a standardised society. In States where that is the aim, political liberty is lost. The task of Government is to provide a framework within which everyone is free to pursue a better life.
We believe that given opportunity, offered the chance, the human spirit will find a better path than the State could ever devise. You cannot build a successful country without believing that the majority of people will use their talents wisely.
Just rewards for inventiveness, energy, foresight and skills; incentives for saving; the creation of real jobs, paid in real money, not confetti money; a nation safe from foreign attack, which stands resolutely in the world for what it knows to be right. Those are our aims.
The longer Labour remains in Government, the more vulnerable this country will be.
Change is coming, the slither and slide to the socialist state is going to be stopped in this United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Stopped and turned back. It can be done and it will be done and we shall start on the 3rd May 1979.
I do not regard society as polarised. Indeed, it is not. The commentators like to try to make it so, but it is not. The greater part of society is ... believes in orderly freedom. It totally and utterly rejects extremes.
Socialism is not a creed of the people. Socialism is a doctrine of the intellectuals, a particular kind of intellectual who had the arrogance to believe that they could do it better than other people because they could plan everyone's lives.
Marx was wrong about the working-class when he wrote his books; and his prescriptions have as little use today as other mid-Victorian arguments have as to what should, or should not, be done.
Britain has been in a state of decline. And the significant thing is that this decline has gone on at exactly the same time as the rights and freedoms of the individual have been chipped away by the creeping powers of the State.
The Socialist society does not believe that we are grown up. It pats us on the head, tells us to brush our shoes and wipe our faces. Then, if we are good little boys and girls, it gives us our pocket money (which is, incidentally, our money) and tells us to run away and play.
If you were to ask me - and people often do - what I believe in, I could answer you in one simple word: Freedom. In particular, freedom to do, within sensible limits, what you want. And freedom to spend your own money in the way you think fit.
Free enterprise has a universal truth at its heart: to create a genuine market in a state you have to take the state out of the market.
Privatisation shrinks the power of the state and free enterprise enlarges the power of the people.
The Communist Party is like a monstrous parasite which consumes the flesh of its host and leaves behind a shell, which is designed to conceal the change by which the Party has itself become the State.
Today's Labour Party has, in fact, no discernible principles at all. It is rootless, empty and artificial. Its focus groups focused and its spin doctors spun - but its only real purpose was to leave the electorate in a daze.
Through bitter experience Solzhenitsyn has realised the dangers posed by an over-mighty state. The more power that accrues to the state - the less freedom; freedom to make decisions, freedom to make one's own choices, freedom of ideas - remains for the individual citizen.
Socialism is nationalisation of the total means of production, distribution and exchange and the planning of that by the central government - and that is what Gorbachev is saying has not worked.
The Labour Party hasn't moved forward since Karl Marx's ideas, that's why it's totally morally and spiritually bankrupt.
Far better to command respect for doing the right thing long-term than to pursue short-term popularity.
When Dr Johnson remarked that patriotism was the refuge of the scoundrel, he was not, of course, attacking patriotism, only noting how easily base motives and shoddy arguments could be concealed in the trappings of high-mindedness.
Idleness, selfishness, fecklessness, envy, & irresponsibility are vices upon which socialism in any form flourishes & which it in turn encourages. But its devilishly clever tactic is to play up to all these human failings, while making those who practise them feel good about it.
Most people should know by now that unless you pursue the policies of wealth creation, you will not in fact get the improvement of social services that you desire. Just because you speak softly & talk more about welfare and social services doesn't mean that you do more for them.
Idleness, selfishness, fecklessness, envy, & irresponsibility are vices upon which socialism in any form flourishes & which it in turn encourages. But its devilishly clever tactic is to play up to all these human failings, while making those who practise them feel good about it.
Concepts like truth and falsehood, beauty and ugliness, civilization and barbarism have been de-constructed to give way to judgements based on ideology. The results would be funny, if the consequences were not so serious.
The first and perhaps the most important insight which we Conservatives have is that government can do little that is good and much that is harmful, and so the scope of government must be kept to a minimum.
There will always be individualism as long as there are individuals: but in a free society and a free economy individualism works to the general good - in a socialist society and a controlled economy it works against it.
The up-side down world of political correctness is one in which strategies of social control - the enduring objective of the Left - are given free rein.
Isn't it time we spoke up for our way of life? After all, no Western nation has to build a wall round itself to keep its people in.
Mr. Chairman, if we let the grumblers have their way, we would be bending and turning with every twist in the opinion polls. That is not this Government's style, nor this Prime Minister's. Our style is to decide what is right for the country, not what is temporarily convenient.
The Government treats industry like a beast of burden. They put more & more weight on the animal, starve it of nutritious food, harness it ever more tightly and then shout at it to go faster. The regeneration of British industry will begin only when Government get off its back.
We are the people who, among other things, invented the computer, refrigerator, electric motor, stethoscope, rayon, steam turbine, stainless steel, the tank, television, penicillin, radar, jet engine, hovercraft, float glass and carbon fibres. Oh, and the best half of Concorde.
The real difference between the Conservative Party and our socialist political opponents is that we believe that government should act to enlarge the freedom of the individual to live his own life whilst they believe the government should diminish it.
The real test of caring is not how much money is spent but how much treatment is provided. The problems of the National Health Service will never be solved by using them as a political tool.
The Labour Party still clings to the tenets of primeval socialism; still strives for the kind of rigid and controlled society from which even Mr Gorbachev is still struggling to escape.
Wealth has to be created before it can be taxed. That's what puts more into health, puts more into education, puts more into pensions, and still leaves enough to reduce the national debt. That's how it's done. But you have to be a Conservative to do it.
Experience has shown the failure of two fundamental Socialist arguments: that nationalisation is justified because it makes economic power accountable to people whose lives it affects; and that State planning  points to better ways forward than can be charted by free enterprise.
Marxists are quite unable to say why a proletarian revolution, a hate-filled and violent act of expropriation, should be morally cleansing and lead to a better society.
We rejoice that Britain is still respected in all free countries as the Mother of Parliaments and the custodian of the principle of the rule of law.
GULAG was the consequence of socialism. It was not the work of one man. It only happened because socialism demoralised the whole nation, replaced the individual conscience by the party, right and wrong by what was good for the revolution.
Socialism does not produce a classless society; on the contrary it produces the most stratified of all societies, divided into two classes: the powerful and the powerless; the party-bureaucratic elite and the manipulated masses.
Every generation must restate its values in light of present challenges, but also in light of past experience. There has never been greater need for us Conservatives to do so than there is today.
Once the customer is dependent on the State for all his needs; Once the worker can turn only to the State for work; Once there is no possibility of the promotion of the Arts except by patronage of the State; Then, not only Enterprise, but freedom itself is destroyed.
I am interested in responsible trade unionism, responsible trade unionists prepared to build a prosperous industry, which comes from satisfying customers. And with a prosperous industry, we mean a fair deal for the people who work in it.
There are some I would call true trade unionists. That is to say they are not interested in politics. They are interested in the industry in which their people work and getting a fair deal for the people with a prosperous industry.
It [The Berlin Wall] is a monument to oppression and cruelty, but also to futility.
Ronald Reagan carried the American people with him in his great endeavours because there was perfect sympathy between them. He and they loved America and what it stands for: freedom and opportunity for ordinary people.
Labour remains socialist, socialism is a creed which, by its very nature, is central control over the lives of people. Less freedom for people to use their own talents and abilities and make their own decisions, more power by government over people.
I want to lead the people of this country away from the quicksands of Socialism.
When I was British Prime Minister I was not always popular. Reformers rarely are while reforms are going through, though if we struggle on we reap the rewards later.
You must have a government which believes very passionately in what it wants to do, is very strong in its sense of purpose and does not listen to siren voices.
Why is freedom of the Press vital? It is not because our newspapers are invariably literate, scrupulous & wise. They are not. It is because newspapers exist not only to protect their own freedom, but to defend freedom of others. That freedom is threatened both at home and abroad.
I have spoken of the need to understand history. We might have avoided the worst atrocities of Nazism had we learned the lessons of the First World War that the price of freedom is eternal vigilance.
Rich countries are those whose governments have policies which encourage the essential creativity of man who in order to succeed must work with others to produce goods and services which people choose to buy.
Military intervention without an attainable purpose creates as many problems as it solves.
Islamic extremism today, like Bolshevism in the past, is an armed doctrine. It is an aggressive ideology promoted by fanatical, well-armed devotees. And, like Communism, it requires an all-embracing long-term strategy to defeat it.
Labour accuse us of being divisive. I find this hypocritical coming from the party which actually believes, and practises, the theory of class warfare, the block vote, and the closed shop, and whose road to power lies in turning one section of the people against another.
Either you believe in capitalism, or you believe in socialism. Capitalism, as we know, creates wealth. Socialism, as we also know, creates poverty.
Qualities that made Britain what she is haven't changed. Decency, fair play, honest dealing, respect for other's rights - even the rights of people you dislike, especially the rights of people who are vulnerable - these are things that made us the most remarkable nation on earth.
You know, there's a vindictive streak to Socialism that seems to be indelible.
People increasingly yearn for the path of freedom, free enterprise & self reliance. Even in the newly liberated East, they are not seeking a third way between free enterprise and Socialism: they know that, even if Labour doesn't, it leads to the Third World.
Advocates of a federal Europe seek to replace French, British, Italian nationalisms, which are deep-rooted sentiments, with a new European nationalism, which is a bureaucratic fiction. They cannot succeed. But they can sow seeds of great bitterness in the process.
Socialism and political correctness has resurfaced in the language and programmes of "group rights". The process has gone furthest in the United States: though I suspect that if Britain were so foolish as to elect a Labour Government we could quickly catch up.
Left-wing militants rose to the top of Britain's unions. Once there, they used the block vote, the closed shop and the union rule book to dragoon their members into politically-motivated strikes and perpetual unrest.
By the late seventies,  the moderate parliamentary Labour Party was an empty shell. All the real power had been quietly accumulated by the hard left which now controlled the unions, Labour's inner city local government strongholds and the constituency Labour parties.
In the inner cities  -  where youngsters must have a decent education if they are to have a better future  -  that opportunity is all too often snatched from them by hard left education authorities and extremist teachers.
Destroying freedoms we have cherished and defended down the centuries won't worry the far Left. They like everything about Eastern Europe [as it was in 1977] - except, alas, going to live there - because after all the living standards there are very low.
When [nationalised industry] pay claims are made, they are sometimes presented as claims against Governments. But they are really claims which can only be paid for by fellow workers, housewives and consumers generally.
The power of a highly organised minority is great. But it should not be greater than the power of an elected majority. That is the basis of the democratic contract.
Marxist jargon has been replaced by soothing language honed in focus groups. Donkey jackets have given way to Armani suits. Pioneering holidays in Socialist communes have yielded to trendy Tuscan villa-breaks. But the old Left wing rancour and prejudice burn bright within.
New Labour politicians hate so much that Britain stands for, as the Old Left did: it's just that they are better actors.
Never believe that big government is necessarily strong government. The opposite is true. Once Ministers meddle in everything, government has neither the time nor the means to do those things which only government can do.
In today's world, monopoly trade unions have immense potential for destruction and can inflict severe damage and hardship on their fellow workers - indeed on their fellow trade unionists.
We must never give in to the oldest and least democratic trick of all - the coercion of many by the ruthless, manipulating few.
There has come into existence a fashionable view that there is no need to accept the verdict of the majority, that the minority should be quite free to bully, even coerce, to get the verdict reversed.
The negative aspects of equality are that lazy people, passive individuals, and irresponsible employees profit at the expense of dedicated and diligent employees, and unskilled workers profit at the expense of skilled ones.
This election [1979] offers the choice - and that choice may not occur again - between the path of freedom and self-respect and the slow but certain route to national suffocation under a blanket of bureaucracy and State control.
That kind of Britain, a land where men and women are no longer people with ambitions and dreams and ideals, but first numbers in some remote computer is not the kind of Britain I ever want to see.
The Britain I want is a land which cares for the weak the old and the sick but which says that the able-bodied have the duty and the right to shape their own lives.
The Britain I want is a land where a man can know that if he works hard and earns money for his family, he will be allowed to hold on to most of what his efforts have brought him, rather than have it seized to build Ministerial empires.
The Britain I want is a land where people are not ground down in the name of false equality to the point where a man is better off on the dole than at work.
The Britain I Want is a land where people pay their taxes knowing that they are fair and that they will be prudently spent.
I do not want this country to remain a place where taxation is wielded as a punishment for effort and success, and where envy and spite displace charity and compassion as our national ideals.
The Britain I want is a land where a man can take a job he is capable of doing, and work for whom he chooses. Not a land where there is no employer but The State.
I want this country of ours to be a place where those who obey just laws need not go in fear of their jobs or their safety.
The dying, the sick, the old, the children and even the bereaved are now regularly not just the victims, but the targets of industrial action.
The Britain I want is a place where all men and women, whatever their birth, their background, their colour or their religion, truly have the same chance to succeed.
I do not want a Britain where the only way to the top is by knowing which bureaucrats to butter up, or which politicians to please in order to get one of the growing thousands of jobs which can only be gained by ministerial patronage.
The Britain I want is a country which once again is known throughout the world for its integrity, its industry, the calibre of its people and its valiant championship of justice and truth.
Have millions of ordinary, decent trade unionists become heartless militants? I refuse to believe it. What has happened is that, under the ethics of a breed of "socialism" which would have appalled Clem Atlee or Hugh Gaitskell, the trade union ideal has been distorted.
What is more heartless than the all-powerful State? Do not the industrious and farsighted benefit the community as well as themselves?
Nobody, not even the most hardened Labour apologist, can wish to see a repetition of the cruelty and callousness of this winter. None of us can be content with a society where such things happen without check or penalty. In that sense I am a reformer and I am offering a change.
What strikes me is the shameless appeal to voters to accept our national decline as inevitable, and simply to make the best of it. Labour's campaign slogan should be: "Coast downhill with Labour".
Socialism has to be defeated, and soon, or it will be too late. We shall be so far down the road to State control that the near-Communist society will have engulfed us.
The best reply to full-blooded Socialism is not milk and water Socialism, it is genuine Conservatism.
I look to the day when we throw off the Socialist yoke and together turn to the task of setting our country on the road to a real and lasting recovery.
Without choice, no one is free. Free to take it or leave it, whatever it may be. Socialism says, "Take it and lump it."
One reason I'm not a Marxist or a Socialist is because I know you can't fit people into theories. I was trained as a scientist - a chemist - and I know what a real theory is when I see one.
Those who live under the heel of Marxist tyranny look with envy at the very things we take for granted. They know that politics is about more than economics in a free society.
Never forget that the Marxist societies call themselves, and indeed are, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. Some of the aims of socialism, are the aims of a Marxist society, and they result in the subjugation of the rights of people to political theory.
To put it broadly, Conservative government means rule by consent; Socialist government means control by compulsion.
Only truthful ideas, ideas that are in tune with the essential dignity and rights of man, can prevail across the years. The ruins of Marxist communism in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union testify most eloquently to that.
Whatever the difficulties, economies that flourish do so under the banner of the market and not of Marx.
For me, and so many others, our ideas of liberty, of honour, of sacrifice, of fellowship, of valour - our idea of Britain herself - have been formed by Churchill's words.
Britain has a unique and proud record in history of safeguarding and advancing the rights of small nations and oppressed peoples. It was the Royal Navy which abolished the Slave Trade - the most altruistic use of force by a great power the world has seen.
Capitalism, remember, depends on the challenge of competition, not the complacency of corporatism.
It takes courage of a high order to lay yourself open to the taunts and sneers of lesser men who try to diminish your character because they can't defeat your arguments.
The free enterprise economy which underlies our prosperity and underpins our freedoms can survive only in a society devoted to personal liberties under just laws.
Never have our basic values, the Christian values which rest on Hebrew and Hellenic foundations, been so menaced as they are today. Family life, the innocence of children, public decency, respect for the law, pride in good work, patriotism, democracy - all are under attack.
Marxism is ideologically, politically and morally bankrupt.
The old saying has it that the first victim of war is truth. But it is more accurate to say that the first victim of totalitarianism is truth. And truth is what Communists have always feared the most.
The communist system may have been vanquished - but all too often the Communists themselves have not. There are plenty of them wearing a variety of disguises from market socialists to social liberals to fiery nationalists still in positions of power.
Socialists often start by distributing wealth. They forget it first has to be created.
Those who don't understand the past are destined to repeat its errors. In words of Thucydides "History repeats itself" or Dionysius "History is philosophy teaching by example" or  my favourite from Edmund Burke, "History is a pact between the dead, the living, & the yet unborn."
Not one single measure produced by any Socialist Government has extended power to the people. They have given much more power to bureaucrats, much more power to extremists, much more power to Socialist Ministers.
Communism held its people in a grip of terror. It brought neither dignity nor prosperity and in the end it collapsed under the weight of its own failure.
It's the oldest law of politics: government tends to expand and socialist government expands absolutely.
I was brought up to believe it was unforgivable to acquire debts you can't repay, and dishonest to make promises you can only keep at other people's expense.
The moment ownership passes into the name of the public is the moment the public ceases to have any ownership or accountability, and often the moment when it ceases to get what it wants. But it is invariably the moment when the public starts to pay.
The spirit of freedom is too strong and too resilient to be crushed by the tanks of tyrants. The same is true in other parts of the world which suffer from the brutality of despotism.
No matter how hard they try, totalitarian countries can never extinguish the flame of freedom. Again and again, we see the evidence that if only the nations of Eastern Europe were allowed to choose, they would choose democracy and freedom.
The events of September 11 are a terrible reminder that freedom demands eternal vigilance. And for too long we have not been vigilant. We have harboured those who hated us, tolerated those who threatened us and indulged those who weakened us.
Our duty is to remember and remind. To forget the past would dishonour all those who fought heroically to resist communism's evil - it would also place us in danger of repeating its mistakes.
Communism has crumbled, it has lost all credibility, even among nominal believers.
Let us never forget that the triumph over communism was not merely a physical victory, it was a moral victory also.
The danger with socialism, I will tell you, is that you might lose your liberty little by little, with more and more regulation, with more and more nationalisation, with higher and higher taxation, until you look up one day and find a lot of it has gone.
Socialism is the planning by the few over the lives of the many.
Socialists say "publicly owned". What they mean is "State controlled".
Socialists say "Government aid". What they mean is "taxpayers' aid".
Socialists say "social justice". What they mean is "selective justice".
Socialists say "equality". What they mean is "levelling down".
The Socialist myth is that we can make Britain strong by nationalisation and government interference. The truth is that government interference and nationalisation are sapping Britain's strength.
The Socialist myth is that government spending creates jobs. The truth is that the only permanent job creation scheme is a healthy economy.
The Socialist myth is that wealth is there to be redistributed. The truth is that wealth has to be created.
The Socialist myth is that we can preserve our freedoms without defending them. The truth is that in a dangerous world our ability to defend ourselves is essential to preserve peace.
The more a family has of its own money to spend, the more independent it is of the State. The more that is taken away from that family by taxation, the more that family are under the heel of the State. And that is where Socialism wants them.
As one former Socialist MP (Woodrow Wyatt) wrote: "Productivity was never of any interest to the extremists. They would rather control men's lives in uniform misery, according to their definition of the public good, than allow them to flourish freely."
The truth is that Socialism is a system inherently inefficient, wasteful and unjust.
We know what works - the Anglo-Saxon model of liberty, property, law and capitalism. And we know where it works - everywhere it's actually applied.
The freedom we take for granted today was created and upheld by the English speaking peoples. These are the real, practical advantages that come from our history - a great history - and one that doesn't need "re-branding".
Communism, whose denial of liberty of all kinds, personal and economic, was the utter negation of the human spirit.
In a free society, people can give away as much as they want to and whenever they want to. They don't have to say, 'I will only give mine away, if I can compel you to give yours away too.'  If they believe in pooling their possessions with others, they're welcome to do so.
Socialism has been tried and found wanting. Socialism has failed. If we, too, let the lamps of freedom flicker and go out, who will light them again?
Socialism has only one remedy for anything - spend more of the people's money and raise higher taxes.
In a free country people will work hard if it pays them to do so. At present taxes are so high that for many it is not worthwhile working hard, and for some it is not worthwhile working at all. The first step to recovery, therefore, is to lower taxes on earnings.
The Government interferes here much more than it did in the past and much more than it does in other free countries. That interference has hindered us from achieving greater prosperity.
Socialism's central dogma is to make the State the ultimate authority for the whole of life. It's based on coercion. It denies the dignity of people. It is a secular creed which has utterly failed.
Dec 31st, 1978: Where shall we be in 1984? With the Big Brother State of Socialism providing everything on condition that we surrender all that makes life worth living? Or a Conservative Government dedicated to serving the liberty, law, dignity and institutions of a free people?
Over-taxation is transparently foolish. Most of us are willing to work for our families and neighbours but not for the Chancellor of the Exchequer. In a free country people will work hard if it pays them to do so. At present taxes are so high that for many it is not worthwhile.
The writings of Solzhenitsyn made obvious even to the wilfully blind that it was not simply Stalin who was an evil man, but that communism, in practice, is an evil system, which gave birth to Stalin.
The moral fallacy of Socialism is to suppose that conscience can be collectivised.
Governments can animate industry but they should not seek indefinitely to sustain it.
In the last few years, British patriots have, once again, had cause, as John of Gaunt did, to feel ashamed of the way that the nation was being directed. We know that Britain has been in dire straits before, and that she has recovered. She will recover again.
The idea that one can become, as Locke said, "the dictator of principles" and establish as the most basic principle "that principles must not be questioned," is the essence of tyranny.
The idea that some things are more politically correct than others is not new, of course. It has been the guiding sentiment of tyrants in every age who believe that if you can control what people read and thereby what they think then you can control them.
We must be alert to the dangers of over-regulation and creeping control, which any number of fashionable and politically correct agendas demand and which any variety of power-hungry politician will eagerly supply.
If politicians or bureaucrats are given power that is unaccountable & unrestrained they will, in the long-run, be as corrupt as they can get away with. That's the best possible argument for limited government - & a pretty good one too against a centralised European Super-state.
Nazism and Communism - two truly cosmic evils, apparently in conflict, but in their similarity of doctrines and their baseness of appeal, mere mirror images of each other.
Liberty - or freedom if you like - is a perfectly simple concept, understandable to all, it seems, except to the very dim or the very clever.
Communism accounted for approaching a hundred million deaths. It enslaved the East, while its first cousin socialism impoverished much of the West. Nazism - that other brand of socialism - & its tamer forbear Fascism killed about 25 million. All have left scars on our societies.
The undermining of our traditional education systems, which in the New Age of political correctness seems to have gone into over-drive, is now a very grave danger. It threatens the collective memory of our society from which its habits and even its identity flow.
Again I repeat: socialism is not a creed for the people - it is a creed for those who wish to take power for themselves for the sake of exercising power.
Socialists speak of a classless society. But their every action betrays their class consciousness. They talk of mass movements, block votes, class struggle, mass marches, mass this and mass that. People are not masses, or class members, but rather individuals and families.
Lord Acton's aphorism: only a foolish conservative would judge the present by the standards of the past, but only a foolish liberal would judge the past by the standards of the present. There are many foolish liberals in the socialist camp; we can do without them in ours.
As the French economist and critic of socialism, Frederic Bastiat, asked a century and a half ago, how can the socialists, who have such a low opinion of the people's ability to choose have such a high regard for their own?
Let Labour's Orwellian nightmare of the Left be the spur for us to dedicate with a new urgency our every ounce of energy and moral strength to rebuild the fortunes of this free nation.
What we have seen in this country is the emergence of an organised revolutionary minority who are prepared to exploit industrial disputes, but whose real aim is the breakdown of law and order and the destruction of democratic parliamentary government.
The two totalitarian systems which we in Britain had to fight - Nazism and Communism - two socialist tyrannies, let's remember - represented one single model.
Never forget: democracies can, and have, voted for measures which lead to their own destruction. The job of democratic leaders is to warn that easy or popular measures, which may end some immediate conflict, must be resisted if in the end they risk destroying democracy itself.
Great political economists, the greatest of them Adam Smith, have shown how a market economy, by devolving the power of consumer choice to customers, runs with the grain of democracy, which disperses the power of political choice to voters.
To young people, I say: "when you visit Eastern Europe, learn from them about the socialist past that didn't work, & tell them about the Conservative future that will. And then come home & tell your friends of the excitement of people who are tasting freedom for the first time".
Perhaps the single greatest imperative in the Western world today is to reassess our defence requirements on cold, realistic and even pessimistic assumptions and to apply ourselves urgently to fill the gaps.
We must strengthen the family. Unless we do so, we will be faced with heart-rending social problems which no Government could possibly cure - or perhaps even cope with.
Real progress comes not from more bureaucracy, but from the values and institutions of government by consent, through ministers seen to be accountable to their electorate.
The country has been taken further along the road to Socialism. Britain is more divided. We are losing our sense of common purpose and of common pride in being British. Something vital has been lost, which we must restore.
Those of us who believed in the sanctity of the human spirit had no doubt that the communist system would eventually collapse, but it is remarkable that so many people, mostly intellectuals, were taken in by communism's lies.
There are some tin-pot "socialist republics" in local government where you can see today's Labour Party in action: involving intimidation, harassment & anti-police activity; alien to our true British character.
Conservatives everywhere must go on the counter-offensive against the New Left human rights brigade, and with as much intellectual vigour as we employed in struggles with the Old Left in days gone by.
Attempts to suppress national differences or to amalgamate different nations with distinct traditions into artificial states are very likely to fail, perhaps bloodily. The wise statesman will celebrate nationhood - and use it.
What makes good neighbours is often good fences.
We should learn the lesson that as long as a free political system, a free society and a free economy are maintained, the ingenuity of mankind is boundless.
When socialist countries are to be found helping out capitalist countries in their hour of need rather than vice-versa, then - and only then - should we question the system which makes us rich, healthy and secure.
'Social justice' can take a free society into still deeper and more treacherous waters if it is applied not only to equality of opportunity but also to equality of outcomes.
To set the record straight - once again - I have never minimised the importance of society, only contested the assumption that society means the State rather than other people.
What marks out our Conservative vision is the insight that the State - government - only underpins the conditions for a prosperous and fulfilling life. It does not generate them. Moreover, the very existence of this State, with its huge capacity for evil, is a potential threat to all the moral, cultural, social and economic benefits of freedom.
Every step this Socialist Government takes to seize more power over our daily lives diminishes those lives and the freedom which is their essence and their strength. One of our principal and continuing priorities when we are returned to office will be to restore the freedoms which the Socialists have usurped.
To me the most significant lesson is: never appease an aggressor. If we do, he will only grow stronger and more confident, and to secure his ultimate defeat will require greater effort and greater sacrifice. The longer you put off the needed decision and action, the higher the price in blood which has to be paid.
The Conservative Party understands the individual, because it believes in him, and in his potential provided he is allowed to be his own man and not a creature of the State.
Independence and autonomy is the very air that entrepreneurship breathes and lives on. Socialist politicians plan to destroy it.
Communism has totally failed to deliver happiness or prosperity, and its failure has been at the expense of human lives and human dignity. The cost has been terrible.
Greater responsibility gives more dignity to the individual and more strength to the community. That belief is at the heart of Conservatism. We must make it live.
We cannot conceivably accept that a country can simply march into a neighbour, which is an independent country and a full member of the UN, and annex it.
Political myths - especially those cherished by political commentators - die hard; and as soon as one has been exploded by events, another is promptly created to fill its place as the basis of "expert" analysis and prediction.
Few people really believe that a country - any more than an individual - can go on indefinitely living on borrowed money; or that a community can long continue to pay itself for producing less.
The use of quotas applying to the appointment or promotion of individuals because of their collective identity or background is an unacceptable incursion on freedom, however well-intentioned the motives.
Marxism-Leninism is simply not capable of producing either political freedom or economic success, because it does not recognise the dignity of the individual or his desire to better himself.
The primary duty of government is to maintain the absolute sovereignty of the law, always, everywhere and against any institution, however powerful.
The only natural part of Labour Government is the failure which inevitably accompanies its drive to Socialism. The dole queues and frustration in this Socialist paradise are a breeding ground for disaster and despair in the future.
Freedom of discussion is something more than just freedom of speech. Discussion requires a willingness to listen as much as a capacity to debate. Through it we both teach and learn - and the wider it goes the more likely we are to increase the stock of human understanding.
Within our universities we must uphold freedom of thought and of discussion. We must debate the burning issues. We must fiercely fight the battle of ideas. And we must do all this in a spirit of good humour, tolerance and mutual respect.
The battle against socialism is more than the attempt to replace economic error by economic truth. It is a battle for moral and spiritual values. It is precisely socialism which promotes universal dependency on the State and the neglect of all primary duties.
Britain is not just another country. We are the country which has always stood at the forefront in defence of freedom. We are the country which stood alone when Europe fell. And we are the country which, for over nine hundred years, has held out against foreign occupation.
Prosperity will not come by inventing more and more lavish public expenditure programmes. You do not grow richer by ordering another cheque-book from the Bank. No nation ever grew more prosperous by taxing its citizens beyond their capacity to pay.
364 economists who claimed that it was madness to think you could get economic growth by cutting government borrowing were proved wrong: I'm told they were never the same again.
What works here, as elsewhere, is free enterprise and not big government.
It is not the centre ground but the common ground - the shared instincts and traditions of the British people - on which we should pitch our tents. That ground is solid - whereas the centre ground is as slippery as the spin doctors who have colonised it.
There is still virtually nothing that Labour spokesmen wouldn't spend more taxpayers' money on, or wish to control more tightly. They have learned to accompany these prescriptions with Conservative-sounding rhetoric, and even some Conservative-sounding policies.
The risk is that community comes to mean collective; collective comes to mean State; and thus the State expands to replace individual effort with subsidised activism.
In politics, integrity really lies in the conviction that it's only on the basis of truth that power should be won - or indeed can be worth winning. It lies in an unswerving belief that you have to be right.
What marks out our Conservative vision is the insight that the State - government - only underpins the conditions for a prosperous and fulfilling life. It does not generate them.
States, societies and economies, which allow the distinctive talents of individuals to flourish, themselves also flourish. Those which dwarf, crush, distort, manipulate or ignore them cannot progress.
Those eras in which a high value has been placed on the individual are the ones which have known the greatest advances.
The cause of limited government - in which the State is servant not master, custodian not collaborator, umpire not player - is the one beneath whose standard Keith Joseph and I gathered all those years ago.
Anyone who believes that salvation is to be found further away from the basic Conservative principles which prevailed in the 1980s - small government, a property-owning democracy, tax cuts, deregulation and national sovereignty - is profoundly mistaken.
The distinctive mark of every Labour policy, from health to education, from privatised utilities to the labour market, is more government interference.
Splits and disagreements over important issues never did a Party so much harm as the absence of honest, principled debate.
The Labour Party itself may have changed many of its policies, but it hasn't changed its spots. You can tell this from the unpleasant noises it makes when anything like profits are mentioned.
It is free, enterprising, self-reliant, responsible individuals that Britain needs. It's when we have more of them, our communities will take better care of themselves.
There is a still more important reason why Labour should not be entrusted with government. They may protest that they are no longer Socialists: but they have lost none of their zeal for constitutional upheaval.
What Labour can't achieve in an independent, free enterprise Britain, they can hope to secure in a Euro-federalist Britain, whose people's instincts are ignored and whose parliamentary institutions are over-ridden
Limited government doesn't mean weak government, only less government.
Am I alone in suspecting that those in the West, in whose hearts lurked some sympathy with the system the other side of the Berlin Wall, have since been trying to re-write the history of those years?
It would be a bitter irony if we allowed Britain, whether by commission or omission, to fall into the hands of the Labour Party's socialism in disguise - but socialism red in tooth and claw nonetheless.
The Prime Minister [James Callaghan] has chosen to put equality first. We suggest that he should choose to put liberty first. Then he will end up with liberty and fewer inequalities than if he puts equality first and wholly neglects liberty.
The UN depends on consensus & that is simply not an adequate basis for action or for readiness to take combat risks. If we try to rely solely on the UN, we shall rapidly come to see it is as an illusion factory, where copious resolutions become a substitute for effective action.
Many of Islam's ideals are not compatible with democracy, and that could be a great factor for instability and conflict in future. So don't conclude that the world is safe for democracy, it isn't.
State-enforced egalitarianism is always the foe of freedom. For "while democracy seeks equality in liberty, socialism seeks equality in restraint and servitude."
Time and again history beats out the same message. Competition is better for the consumer than State control.
Terrorism is a deadly threat to our way of life, and we will not be cowed by it. We will continue to resist it with all our power and to uphold the principles of democratic government.
And really, you know, politicians, I think should sometimes just be a little bit more modest about their abilities than they are. We can't run everything - and we shouldn't try.
If just a part of the energy put into arguing for redistribution of resources between rich and poor countries had been invested in elaborating ways of getting poor countries access to rich countries' markets, there would be a great deal less poverty in the world.
Conservatives know that the British are at their best in a society where individual people - not the state - make the running and take most of the decisions. Where rewards are related to effort and skill, and where the innovators and creators can breathe deeply and feel at home.
If you devalue the role and status of management, industry will not be properly managed.
If you denigrate profits, we shall lack investment.
Without more jobs, the future's bleak.
Socialists are nothing if not great levellers - down.
The success of capitalism is that it benefits the masses, not just the few.
When we can't run our own financial affairs properly - we don't command much respect in the world.
Inflation arises because some politicians lead the people to believe that they can consume more - much more - than they produce.
Politicians mustn't promise more than the people can produce and the people mustn't be taken in by those who do.
No nation ever retained its freedom for any length of time after losing its respect for the law, after losing the law-abiding spirit.
We stress the need to have enough police, to have them well paid, well equipped and well respected.
Crime grows where the pressure of established values and conventions is removed.
Children must be taught what is right and wrong and the religious basis of those values.
Once the law and its moral basis is humbled, all else that is valuable in a civilised society will vanish.
It is our job to go about telling everybody to obey the law.
Patriotism is the fourth pillar of national greatness. Take it away, and greatness decays; national freedom, even national survival will be placed in jeopardy.
Patriotism links the individual with the nation, not only with its present but with its past and with its future.
Our opponents offer only division and discord, socialism and separatism.
It seemed as though in 1917 the world had unwittingly entered into a great experiment to decide which was the better way of life for our peoples. Then the Communist system collapsed and its cruelties and poverty of spirit became clear to all.
The threat to peace comes from Communism, which has powerful forces ready to attack anywhere. Communism waits for weakness, it leaves strength alone. Britain therefore must be strong, strong in arms, and strong in faith in her own way of life.
In every age, there's a tendency for government to take more power; to take more money; and to make its citizens more and more dependent - and all the while to tell them soothingly it's for their own good.
Let us remember that it was Marxism, the creed of the intellectual not of the people, which took away all property and all freedom and ultimately produced a world of fear, misery and servitude.
Of course, there is some poverty in capitalist societies: but there is far more poverty - as well as far less freedom - in socialist ones.
There can be no freedom without a free enterprise economy. Every free country in the world is a free enterprise country.
What are the lessons then that we've learned from the last thirty years? First, that the pursuit of equality itself is a mirage. What's more desirable and more practicable than the pursuit of equality is the pursuit of equality of opportunity.
You will have noted too how socialists consider themselves qualified to lay down what is good for all countries and societies, for the Chinese and the Chileans, Uruguayans and Paraguay - and never does a shadow of self-doubt cross their closed little minds.
Religion teaches us that every human being is unique & must play his part in working out his own salvation. So whereas socialists begin with society, and how people can be fitted in, we start with Man, whose social and economic relationships are just part of his wider existence.
Socialists, however, are obsessed with equal outcomes at the expense of equal opportunities. Time and again, we erected ladders for children to climb; time and again, the Socialist politicians climbed them, and having done so, they tried to kick them away.
Unlike the Socialists, our policies have never been merely a local version of an international creed; they have always been and remain British policies, for application within the framework of British institutions, which have evolved slowly since Saxon days.
The balance has moved too far towards collectivism.
Heavy taxation had lowered fiscal morality.
If the State usurps or denies the right of the individual to make, where he is able to do so, the important decisions in his life and to provide the essentials for himself and his family, then he is demeaned and diminished as a moral being.
A free society is inseparable from a free economy. It is impossible to have the first without the second. Yet Socialists do not believe in a free economy. They believe instead in state control. They believe, too, in the Government spending money before it has been earned.
The real case against socialism is not its economic inefficiency, though on all sides there is evidence of that. Much more fundamental is its basic immorality.
Socialism's results have ranged between the merely shabby and the truly catastrophic - poverty, strife, oppression and, on the killing fields of communism, the deaths this century of perhaps 100 million people.
I call the Conservative Party now to a crusade. Not only the Conservative Party. I appeal to all those men and women of goodwill who do not want a Marxist future for themselves or their children.
No theory of government was ever given a fairer test or a more prolonged experiment in a democratic country than democratic socialism received in Britain. Yet it was a miserable failure in every respect.
I believe our way of life is infinitely superior for every human being than any which the Communist creed can offer.
My friends, every generation has to fight anew the battle for liberty. In my generation, Nazism and then Communism were the enemy, and they very nearly prevailed. Then, as now, strong arms and stout hearts were called upon to sustain the struggle for truth and right.
No drunken sailor, no shrunken Socialist fleet of drunken sailors, could have spent more money less wisely or less well [than this Labour government].
Senator Pinochet is in truth on trial, not for anything contained in Judge Garzon's indictment, but for defeating communism.
There is still in our own countries, particularly in the media class, a pervasive culture of puerile anti-westernism that needs to be changed.
The State has sucked industry dry to finance its own schemes. But only thriving and profitable industry will give us the money to make real improvements in health, education and pensions.
Socialism is the denial of choice, the denial of choice for ordinary people in their everyday lives.
Socialism demands that all should be alike-that the unequal should be artificially made equal.
One of the great errors of our time is to equate the community aspect of our lives with the power of Government exercised through bureaucracy.
Two things are guaranteed to destroy prosperity: socialism and inflation.
Socialism was a patent failure which should be cast onto the trash heap of history.
Socialism requires coercion to impose the will of the State on the lives of the people and is as discredited and as bankrupt as the Marxist parties.
The answer is less Socialism.
A free way of life gives both dignity and prosperity that you do not get in Communism.
If the State appropriates the better part - or even a very large part - of the national wealth and the national income for its own purposes, however admirable, then the light of individual freedom will begin to flicker; and will in time be snuffed out.
The Socialist myth is that governments can promise more & more, and take more & more, but that we can still keep our freedom. The truth is that if government does everything for you, it will take everything from you - first your money, then your dignity, & finally your freedom.
Socialists the world over are peddling a false political prospectus. They promise freedom, but when in power they snuff it out.
It is one of the great paradoxes of history that Socialism, which has done so much harm - was born of a great humanitarian urge - the desire to give people dignity and security. The trouble is that too much security removes a man's dignity by attenuating his freedom.
I am reminded of a remark by George Orwell: 'You have to be an intellectual to believe such nonsense. No ordinary man could be such a fool'.
Socialism is only about distribution: first the distribution of the wealth created by free enterprise, then of the poverty created by Socialism.
Socialism demands the concentration of power, and a drab uniformity throughout. Under Socialism all initiative, all authority, all resources, all wealth are eventually concentrated in the hands of Government.
Freedom is our most precious possession. To defend it and maintain it is no passive task, but one that requires continuous vigilance and resolve. Let it never be said that the dedication of those who love freedom is less than the determination of those who would destroy it.
Labour just wants power at any price and they'll say anything to get it. Labour's real prescription for Britain is the disease half the world is struggling to cure.
We are losing our sense of common purpose and of common pride in being British.
We believe in the diffusion of power. Spreading power among the people - political power, economic power, above all the power of people to run their own lives and to make their own decisions. The Socialists want power over people. We want to give power to people.
We believe in standing ready to defend our beliefs. History does not long entrust the care of freedom to the weak and timid.
I owe nothing to Women's Lib.
The trend of Labour legislation, especially in the field of trade union law, has blurred the legal concept of threats to the point where Labour's Attorney-General, with terrifying complacency, refers to "lawful intimidation."
Socialism is a dangerous, but undeclared, enemy of freedom - and I do not just mean the socialist command economy but all those attitudes which socialism fosters: dependence, passivity, conformity, envy, lack of personal responsibility and lack of initiative.
By undermining the self-respect of so many of the most vulnerable members of society - the respectable poor struggling for decency against the odds - the dependency culture poisoned and weakened society as a whole.
Only a Conservative government will cut out the red tape, the bureaucratic interference, the lethal taxes which have so poisoned the business atmosphere of this country.
Green socialism is no more an answer to the world's environmental needs than was the smoke-stack socialism of Eastern Europe which poisoned our rivers, disfigured our buildings and rotted our forests.
When hecklers stand up ... I get a mental jump for joy. It gives me something to get my teeth into - and the audiences love it.
We must recognise certain groups of people who need help, but the rest of us must take responsibility for ourselves, and we must stop being such a subsidised-minded society.
I've no idea why people keep attacking me. I don't deserve it at all.
I'm not hard, I'm frightfully soft - but I will not be hounded. I will not be driven anywhere against my will.
The better I do, the more is expected of me. I am ready for that. I think I have the strength to do anything that I feel has to be done.
We must build a society in which each citizen can develop his full potential, both for his benefit and for the community as a whole.
If your only opportunity is to be equal then it is not opportunity.
We do not believe that if you cut back what Government does you diminish its authority. On the contrary, a Government that did less, and therefore did better, would strengthen its authority.
The cuts are not divisive. Too much state spending is divisive. It divides the honest saver from the profligate spender. It favours those who live for the day rather than those who provide for the morrow.
Liberty and property are intricately bound up in our history; and a country that has no property right has no human rights... You cannot have freedom without capital and private property in the hands of the people.
Unless we change our ways and our direction, our greatness as a nation will soon be a footnote in the history books, a distant memory of an offshore island, lost in the mists of time like Camelot, remembered kindly for its noble past.
Young people ought not to be idle. It's very bad for them.
I believe in the acceptance of personal responsibility, freedom of choice, and the British Empire, which took freedom and the rule of law to countries which would never have known it otherwise.
Fear is not the basis for foreign policy.
The legal system we have and the rule of law are far more responsible for our traditional liberties than any system of one man one vote. Any country or Government which wants to proceed towards tyranny starts to undermine legal rights and undermine the law.
Freedom under the law must never be taken for granted.
Prime Ministers must learn to live with criticism. After all - and despite the occasional strong temptation - Prime Ministers can no longer have those with whom they disagree taken out of circulation.
Modern liberty rests upon three pillars. They are: representative democracy; economic freedom; and the rule of law.
Sometimes we have to prescribe unpleasant and even painful remedies: but that is because we really care about curing the disease that has afflicted Britain. We want to restore her to full strength again.
There are those who say our nation no longer has the stomach for the fight. I think I know our people and I know they do.
We Conservatives don't duck the difficult issues. We face them determined to overcome them.
We're in the business of planting trees, for our children and grandchildren, or we have no business in politics at all. We're not a one-generation party. We don't intend to let Britain become one. Let's not forget the lesson of history. The long term always starts today.
The only way we can achieve great things for Britain is by asking great things of Britain. We will not disguise our purpose, nor betray our principles. We will do what must be done. We will tell the people the truth and the people will be our judge.
It is Government's job to maximise the liberty of the people under a rule of law and therefore to make your Government systems serve the liberty of the people, and not to extinguish them. In other words, the Government is servant of the people and not their master.
I am far more interested in achieving the things in which I believe in than I am in my own personal future. Far more interested.
Freedom of speech is freedom to say what other people disagree with, not merely things which are anodyne.
Choice is the essence of ethics. If there were no choice there would be no ethics, no good, no evil. Good and evil only have meaning in so far as man is free to choose.
If someone is confronting our essential liberties, if someone is inflicting injuries and harm, by God I'll confront them!
We intend freedom and justice to conquer. Yes, we do have a creed and we wish others to share it. But it is not part of our policy to impose our beliefs by force or threat of force.
I am an undiluted admirer of American values and the American dream and I believe they will continue to inspire not just the people of the United States but millions across the face of the globe.
For me, so long as Britain is true to herself - with the freedom to decide for herself what is best for herself - she will always be Great Britain. 26 September 1995
The idea that men must govern themselves not by the arbitrary commands of a ruler but by their own considered judgement is the means whereby chaos is replaced by order, violence by the peaceful resolution of differences, and tyranny by freedom.
Liberty is a plant of slow growth and one that demands constant and careful attention. Yet there seems to be an inevitability about it, for liberty is man's natural and desired condition.
Creating the practical circumstances in which freedom can flourish requires more than the mere parroting of empty phrases like 'human rights'.
There are a few times when I get home at night and everything has got on top of me when I shed a few tears, silently, alone.
We are not in politics to ignore people's worries, we are in politics to deal with them.
Many of our troubles are due to the fact that our people turn to politicians for everything.
To accuse me of being inflexible is absolute poppycock.
I hope the one quality I am not lacking is courage.
Oh, I have lots of human weaknesses, who hasn't?
I've seen and heard so many things on the BBC that infuriate me almost every day of the week - tendentious reporting, unfair comment, unbearable violence and vulgarity - that I hesitate to say yes when any part of the BBC asks me to do anything.
I don't like strident women.
My job is to stop Britain going red.
Socialism and Britain go ill together. It is not the British character.
They haven't changed their Socialist spots. They've just changed their suits.
We must take with us into the 1990s the lessons of the decade we are leaving behind. And the overwhelming lesson is that Socialism has failed.
A bully has no respect for a weakling. And the way to stop a bully is not to be weak. The way to stop a bully for ever being a bully is to say, 'I'm as strong as you. Anything you do to me, I can do to you.'
In my view dictators do not surrender. They have to be well and truly defeated.
The Russians put guns before butter. We put just about everything before guns.
Economic sanctions are not the way to promote peaceful change. Sanctions don't work. Indeed they make problems worse. They would be a blow to all those firms and people who are in the forefront of efforts to end apartheid by giving black Africans more jobs & greater opportunity.
Terrorism has to be defeated; it cannot be tolerated or side-stepped.
I do not like apartheid. It is wrong. I like valuing people for what they are, not for their colour or their background.
When you stop a dictator there are always risks, but there are great risks in not stopping a dictator. My generation learnt that long ago.
Power as a Minister doesn't give you power over the people. In the end, it's the people who have power over you.
I don't want a Cabinet of yes-men or yes-women. It's not healthy. I can't stand sycophants.
I don't believe they [the voters] want a Government to be so flexible it becomes invertebrate. You don't want a Government full of flexi-toys.
We believe a Government's task is to give people the opportunity, not a handout.
Free enterprise has enabled the creative and the acquisitive urges of man to be given expression in a way which benefits all members of society. Let free enterprise fight back now, not for itself, but for all those who believe in freedom.
Our aim is to make tax collecting a declining industry.
We need to create a mood where it is everywhere thought morally right for as many people as possible to acquire capital.
We should not expect the state to appear in the guise of an extravagant good fairy at every christening, a loquacious companion at every stage of life's journey, the unknown mourner at every funeral.
Trade has been a great engine of post-war growth. All have gained from the greater freedom of trade and payments. Freer trade has meant lower prices, more competition and faster growth. And every consumer has benefited.
Governments should not run business.
Government after Government has learnt the same lesson - or should have. Labour's Manifesto reminds us that some people never learn. The lesson is simple - runaway inflation runs away with your most cherished plans - not to mention your savings.
I don't believe you can go on spending money you haven't got.
The most debilitating myth was that the state can perpetually provide a higher standard of living regardless of individual effort. It can't and it never could.
We exploded the myth that Governments can spend their way to economic revival - a half doctrine of Maynard Keynes peddled by those who persistently ignore the other half.
Everything a politician promises at election time has to be paid for either by higher taxation or by borrowing.
Governments do not create the wealth. They consume it. It is the people who create the wealth and they need the incentive of tax cuts to do it.
To surrender the pound, to surrender our power of self-government, would betray all that past generations down the ages lived and died to defend.
I simply do not understand how Ken Clarke could lead today's Conservative Party to anything other than disaster.
The Labour Party, in pursuit of their egalitarian ideas, have consistently given priority to the redistribution of wealth. In the end that can only mean we shall all be equally poor.
Communism - as the most extreme and odious variety of socialism - seeks to deny Man's God-given and unequal talents, seeks to pervert the natural aspirations of human nature and seeks to crush the human spirit.
We believe that individuals have a right to liberty that no state can take away. That Government is the servant of the people, not its master. That the role of Government is to strengthen our freedom, not deny it. That the economic role of Government is to establish a climate in which enterprise can flourish, not to elbow enterprise out of the way.
We must never forget that it is in fact capitalism which has the moral quality in society. Not socialism, which is the elevation of the power of the government over the people.
We should be warned. A society only needs one generation to abandon the task of learning and transmitting its culture, for that culture to become an alien, lifeless, irrelevance. A powerful, radical left-wing clerisy is bent on destroying what every past generation would have understood to be the central purpose of education.
Britain must stop being the kind of country that drives success into exile. That's another reason for cutting taxes. High personal taxes squeeze out talent and hard work. When that happens we are all diminished. We should honour success in all fields; in science, in commerce, in the arts, in sport. We must encourage it and help people to profit from it. Why begrudge them? We can be proud of their success. It enriches the lives of all our people.
There'll never be a perfectly balanced economy. There's no such thing as total security. No job, no business can be guaranteed for ever. No government can free the people from material worries. But government can make people poor. It can waste what people create. Or it can provide the conditions which favour those private efforts and endeavours that bring prosperity.
There is a growing realisation in Britain that the progressives were wrong. They are being proved wrong by the failure of the very system they advocated. To finance the extension of Socialism on so vast a scale, taxation has risen to penal levels. We have all seen the results - for living standards, for incentive and for enterprise - of the excessive tax burden in Britain.
With Socialism there are no half-measures; it's the full draught or nothing.
There is an increasing belief that freedom is divisible. No myth is more dangerous. Freedom is indivisible.
Once the State controls the means of production, distribution and exchange, all of us become dependent upon it.
State Socialism is not in the character of the British people. It has no place in our traditions. It has no hold on our hearts.
Socialism whetted appetites for more, but has resulted in less being available.
Freedom and Socialism just don't mix.
Capitalism is the moral way of running an economy.
Free enterprise capitalism is economic democracy.
The secret of our success can be summed up in just one word - enterprise.
Capitalism alone can mobilise people's talents.
Political freedom and economic freedom go hand in hand. One will not long outlast the other.
The customer is King, not the politician and the bureaucrat.
Free enterprise is the only way to create the wealth that the nation needs and to provide a better life for all our people.
All modern governments are infected with these viruses to some extent. Only Socialism makes a virtue of the disease.
Socialism and freedom cannot long co-exist in the same society.
Freedom demands the diffusion of power. Socialism demands the concentration of power.
Socialism is not social - it is an "ism", it is a control.
It is free enterprise, which creates wealth, not meddling governments.
The choice before our people is the historic choice; between state domination and personal freedom. Between suffocating, and breathing free.
Their hand is in your pocket all the time. They restrict your choice and make you pay for it.
We in Britain have seen that every advance to Socialism reduces the individual, exalts the State, exacerbates our economic problems and drains away our wealth.
Everywhere there is a crisis of Socialism. Everywhere a confirmation that capitalism produces freedom and prosperity.
Freedom has to be valued for itself - not just for its material benefits.
Political and personal freedom are only part of the equation. They are inseparable from economic freedom.
A strong Government knows where to draw the line. It has the confidence to trust the people.
Month by month, almost day by day, the freedom of free enterprise is curtailed and the power of the State enhanced.
Labour's stake-holding economy may sound comfortingly similar to the Conservative vision of a property-owning democracy. In fact, the two are diametrically opposed.
Politics is the art of making the impossible happen.
You simply have to give people the opportunity to do better.
The important thing, when you're making fundamental changes, is that you have to persevere until they work.
You never, never, never allow the bullet and the bomb to oust the express view of the people by ballot.
Europe has only been single under tyranny, not under liberty.
People left Europe to get away from it and they went to America to become part of a very very great country.
People's greatest fear is that they will lose their national identity... we ought not to be moving towards government by a technocratic elite: that is precisely what the peoples of Eastern Europe are moving away from.
Quite simple: Do you give up the power to issue your own currency? Do you give up the pound sterling?
When will they learn? You cannot build Jerusalem in Brussels.
It is well known that the advocates of European federalism have never lacked access to funding. Not so those who seek to preserve British sovereignty.
No-one with a conscience can let this go on.
We knew that the Stalinist system would always produce misery and tyranny, but could never produce prosperity and dignity—and we said so.
From quite early on, communism could only be sustained in power by force and by the vested interests of the elite.
Moreover, China and the other oppressive socialist states of Asia actually withstood the economic crisis quite well – prisons offer, after all, their own kind of security to the inmates.
For decades Socialists have extended their power until they control almost half the world's population. How has the theory worked out in practice? Disastrously. Wherever they have imposed their heavy hand, people are worse off and less free.
It was the crushing of human personality which Communism embodied that has left so many in the former communist countries unwilling and even unable to shoulder responsibility for their own lives.
But Communism was only the extreme form of the socialist plague. Its failure was only the extreme failure of socialist doctrines throughout the world.
Communism had no idealism about it; it was totally contrary to the sanctity of the individual, totally contrary to everything we believe in.
The free market disperses power throughout society — it's a kind of “economic democracy” — whereas socialism in all its forms concentrates power at the centre.
Socialists oppose the widening of property ownership because it brings to every citizen a new independence and breaks down the old class divisions on which they thrive.
The Socialist immediately thinks of solving a problem by Government taking power and property and keeping it, and not by helping people to solve the problem by themselves and then handing back property.
All round the world Socialists are abandoning their dogma because they know that it does not work and brings neither prosperity nor dignity.
